---
layout: default
title: Sqaut Variants
permalink: /convict-conditioning/squat-variants
nav_exclude: true
---

## Variants

- [Lunges](#lunges)
- [Leg Press Lunges](#leg-press-lunges)
- [Sissy Squats](#sissy-squats)
- [Hindu Squats](#hindu-squats)
- [Plyometric Jumping](#plyometric-jumping)
- [Stair/Hill Sprints](#stair-hill-sprints)
- [Car Pushing](#car-pushing)
- [Fireman Sprints](#fireman-sprints)

---

### Lunges
Lunges are a classic squat substitute. Stand with your feet together, and take a long step out in front of you. Bend at both knees, keeping the spine straight, until your front knee is bent at a right angle and your rear knee nearly touches the floor. Now rise back up, pushing through your feet until your knees are straight. At this point you can either continue the motion into a step backwards to the starting position and repeat, or step forwards and through with your rear leg so that you can lunge ahead, switching legs. Obviously confined to a cell we didn’t have much space, so we stepped back to the start position and alternated our legs, lunging forwards with the right, stepping back, lunging forwards with the left, and so on. But if you have a long stretch of space ahead of you, you don’t need to keep going back to the start position. You can just keep on stepping forwards with your opposite leg. If your legs are in good shape, you can cover long distances this way. I once met a kickboxer who swore by this method. He didn’t even count reps—he judged his workout by lengths of his local football field!

---

### Leg Press Lunges
Leg Press Lunges
This is a nice variation of the lunge which focuses on one leg at a time. Place one leg up on something at about knee height. For me, a bunk is about right, but using stairs can help you find the best level for you. Experiment with different steps. Your raised leg should be out in front of you, with a minor bend in the knee. Now—keeping your back straight—bend at the knee and hip of the raised leg, until your hamstring presses against your calf. At this point, your thigh should be close to your chest. You can bend the knee of the rear leg a bit to ensure that you are secure, but the main motion should come from the front leg. Pause for a moment before pushing back up again with your front leg until it’s back to where you started. This motion looks like a kick, but obviously a lot slower and smoother. Complete your target reps, and then switch legs. A few hundred reps will sear delicious pain into your quads the next morning.

---

### Sissy Squats
Grab something sturdy with one hand, for support. Stand up straight with your feet together or nearly so, and bend at the knees, keeping the hips locked straight. This will require rising onto your toes, and applying a mild backwards lean of the torso. At first this exercise is tricky, because you want to bend forwards at the waist, but eventually you’ll get the hang of it. Most of the force is transmitted through the knees, so never bend them more than ninety degrees. At first, even this depth may seem impossible, so work up to it. Pause at the bottom, before pushing back to the start position and repeating. This is an unusual technique, and beyond simply adding reps, it’s hard to make the exercise progressive. But it’s a useful exercise to have in your training arsenal—sissy squats don’t involve any significant bend at the hips, so it’s a good way to keep the quadriceps conditioned while recovering from a lower back injury. There seems to be some dispute as to how this exercise got its name. Most sources seem to think it’s because the leverage works against the muscles, making even a strong man feel like a sissy, but my mentor Joe Hartigen swore that the exercise was named after the Greek king, Sisyphus. According to mythology, Sisyphus was condemned to roll a huge boulder up a hill every day for eternity, only to be doomed to watch it roll back down as dusk arrived. Unfortunate. Bet he had great thighs though.”

---

### Hindu Squats
This is an exercise used by Indian wrestlers for centuries. With your feet shoulder width apart or a little wider, drop down onto your haunches, raising your heels as you do so. Immediately—with no pause—push yourself back up using leg power, rocking back on your heels as you go. This rocking movement back and forwards on the heels generates a kind of see-saw type rhythm as your center of gravity shifts forwards and back, up and down. This rhythm in turn encourages greater speed, greater explosiveness than in usual squats. Unlike regular squats, this ballistic performance is actually a core element of Hindu squats. Finding a way to gently swing your arms in tune with the movement will help cultivate and maintain the rhythm. Don’t pause at the bottom or the top—to get the motion right, you need constant movement. There are good and bad pints about Hindu squats. On the down “side, Hindu squats are no replacement for the regular squat series, because the only way you can make them progressive is by adding reps. This develops stamina, but not strength. In addition, the momentum used during the natural rhythm may irritate the knees of some athletes. On the plus side, the rhythmic nature of Hindu squats make them an excellent choice for a high rep alternative to running for those who wish to develop lower body endurance but with little floor space. They also provide great cardio benefits. If you chose to use them, work them into your program gradually, to allow your knee tendons to get used to the exercise.

---

### Plyometric Jumping
Squatting develops muscular size and strength. But to be able to unleash this strength quickly, it’s helpful to incorporate some plyometric work into your leg training once in a while. Fortunately, explosive leg training is easy—the legs are instinctively explosive during sprinting, hopping, kicking, etc. Perhaps the most focused form of plyometric training is jumping. Jumping is natural, safe, and can be done virtually anywhere. Plyometric trainees in gyms often use sturdy platforms for box jumps, which involve hopping up onto a box from a fixed stance. You really don’t require any equipment to do plyometric jumping though. In San Quentin my first cellmate taught me a technique he learned in the military called dead leaps. Just place your feet together and dip quickly, before jumping forward as far as you can. Keep your feet together as you land, and try not to topple forwards or the jump doesn’t count. This is actually harder than it looks, as people normally take a run-up—at least a step or two—before they jump anywhere. When jumping for explosiveness, emphasize power rather than high reps. Warm up, and repeat the jumps for two or three sets of four to six reps—that’s all you need. As you progress, you’ll naturally jump further. We marked the cell floor with a piece of chalk, and tried to beat our own records every week. If you run out of space (this is easy to do in a cell), begin doing your dead leaps with just a single “leg. Stand on one leg and dip down, before jumping as far as you can. You need to land on the same foot you pushed from and land without falling otherwise the jump isn’t valid. If you enjoy unilateral work, you can also experiment with box jumping using one leg. This advanced exercise involves jumping out of a one-leg squat onto a box, but don’t even attempt this unless you have super-healthy knees. Traditional high jumping and long jumping are also good athletic training, but to me, dead leaps are the best jumping technique because they also teach balance and control—and without these, explosive power isn’t as useful.

Very few athletes—no matter how strong—have the awesome explosive power to perform full single leg box jumps like this.

---

### Stair/Hill Sprints
This was never an exercise I was able to get into in prison, but I have spoken to guys who swear by incline sprinting. Find yourself a big, ugly flight of stairs. One storey in a house isn’t enough—try the stairs in a big apartment building, or preferably the stairs in a sports arena between events. The more intimidating the better. If you live in the country and can’t find arena stairs, a nice steep hill will get the job done just as well. Starting at the bottom, just run up the incline. How easy is that? The answer is—not easy at all. Whether on stairs or a hill, carrying your bodyweight quickly upwards is incredibly demanding on your energy systems. After just a few seconds you are gasping to get your breath, and before your know it your legs are full of lactic acid. By the time you get to the top of the stairs (if you make it), your legs will be like jelly and you’ll feel lucky to be alive. Whatever you do, don’t run back down—your exhaustion will diminish your coordination and control, making a nasty tumble a possibility. Walk down instead. “Over time, you can improve your performance by bettering your time or doing more laps of the stairs. Stair sprints are popular with combat athletes; it was the previous generation of UFC fighters—champs like Maurice Smith—who brought this old technique back to the attention of the training public. Many athletes practice this method instead of barbell squats, because it generates maximum lower body endurance with little risk to joints if done properly. It seems to have a lot of promise, and I regret not having access to big stairs when I was at my peak. Give it a try, but be warned—it’s very intense and may well make you puke if you go too hard too soon.

---

### Car Pushing
When I was a kid I saw a Dick Butkus interview where he talked about developing his awesome power for football by pushing a two-ton vehicle around when he was in high school. As a result, I became obsessed with the idea of pushing cars. It seemed like something only Superman could do. Whenever I got the chance, I would push my mom’s scratched up Ford Maverick a short way along the block. My arms were like spaghetti when I was a kid and it took forever to get a few yards, but man was it a satisfying feeling! I don’t follow the Chicago Bears much any more, but as soon as I got out of prison I quickly rediscovered my love of car pushing. Find a clear stretch of road or track, turn off your engine and stick your whip into neutral (you might experience a little trouble if you keep it in gear). Get round the back of your car and put your palms on the metal of the trunk—you don’t want to be putting a load of force through a glass rear windshield just in case. Keep your arms nearly straight and lean into the movement as much as you can. Push away with your legs. Once you get over the vehicle’s inertia, pushing gets a little easier. But not much. You’ll have to push off your toes as you go, and this is fantastic for the calves. The legs get a massive workout, but so does the back, midsection, chest, shoulders and arms. Build up to pushing the car one hundred yards, if you can find a free strip that long. Measure the distance using strides—a hundred long steps will be about right. When you can do this, time yourself. Do the stretch two or three times once or twice a week, and try to beat your best time whenever you can. This builds dangerous levels of strength-athleticism! Car pushing is a phenomenally functional leg exercise, because it teaches you to transmit all the power you developed though squatting right through the body. Pushing this way helps your muscles understand how to express large forces, and this is useful in wrestling, martial arts, football and pretty much all truly athletic sports. It’ll help if you get cornered by a couple of enemies in the yard, too.

---

### Fireman Sprints
This is an intense method of sprinting that requires a training partner. Bend down and press your shoulder into your buddy’s waist. As he doubles over you, stand up straight, hoisting him clean off the ground. This will have his head down around your back, with his feet dangling around your thighs. Hook your nearest arm around his legs for stability. This is the classic fireman’s lift. From this position, run as fast as you safely can to a fixed goal about a hundred yards away. Then place your partner back on his feet, and have him carry you back. Repeat this torture on alternating sides for as many cycles as you can stomach. “Like stair sprints and car pushing, this exercise is great for heart and lung capacity, cardiovascular stamina, leg metabolism and total body energy generation. It’s an interesting and demanding technique, but—like any exercise involving external loads—there are inherent risks. Warm up well, wear solid boots to protect your ankles and retain mental focus throughout the exercise. This method isn’t only popular with firefighters; it’s also used extensively by bodyguards and close protection specialists, who might have to carry a client out of a dangerous area quickly.

---

