---
layout: default
title: Push Up Variants
permalink: /convict-conditioning/push-up-variants
nav_exclude: true
---

## {{ page.title }}

There are numerous variants of the basic pushup movement. While you should endeavor to spend the majority of your training time working through the ten steps of the pushup series outlined earlier, you may, on occasion, want to experiment with these alternatives—perhaps as finishing exercises, when working around a light injury, or for the sake of variety. In this section you will find descriptions of some of the most useful alternative variations of the pushup.

### Dips
This is a classic high school exercise. Take hold of parallel bars or two surfaces on either side of your body, lift your feet off the ground and bend at the elbows and shoulders to lower yourself down. Keep bending the elbows until the upper arms are parallel with the ground then press back up. Try to keep your torso erect as you go. This exercise can be made easier by raising the feet onto a surface level with the hips. In this version the hands can be placed behind the trainee, perhaps on a bed, table, bench, etc. As a result, this easier version is sometimes called bench dips. Dips and bench dips are not true pushup movements, but they strongly work many of the same pressing muscles. They also powerfully effect the lats, the large muscles on the side of the upper back, in a dynamic way.

### Decline Pushups
Confusingly, these are sometimes wrongly called incline pushups. They simply involve doing your pushups with the feet raised onto any surface higher than the hands. In prison a lot of guys use their bunk, but you can go higher with a desk or basin. Some men even wedge their feet high against the wall, but it requires a lot of body tension to retain this position. Raising the feet makes the exercise harder by transferring a greater proportion of the bodyweight through the hands. Because of the increased angle, this movement effects the shoulders and upper portions of the chest more intensely than the prone pushup. I don’t advise my students to spend time on the decline pushup, because handstand pushups (see chapter 10) convey all the benefits of decline pushups in a more concentrated way. If you are doing handstand pushups, you are simply covering the same ground (but less efficiently) if you do decline pushups too. You are also risking overtraining.

### Wide Pushups
These are the opposite of close pushups—instead of putting your hands together, you place them wider than usual, up to twice shoulder width. This variation takes much of the stress off the triceps and elbow joint and places more pressure on the pectorals at the point where they meet the front of the shoulder. In layman’s terms, it works the chest more than the triceps. This type of pushup won’t make you much stronger at doing pushups, because the chest/shoulder girdle is normally already proportionately much stronger than the elbow joint; doing this exercise consistently will only enhance that differential. That said, it’s a useful exercise to master if you are specializing on your pectorals.

### Superman Pushups
Full pushups are usually done with the hands at shoulder level or in line with the chest. In Superman pushups you do your reps with your hands flat on the floor way out in front of you, at nearly arm’s length. In this position, you’ll look a little like you’re flying—hence the name. Due to the increased leverage of this technique, Superman pushups strongly work the upper pectorals and pec minor, as well as the lats and the tendons around the armpits. On the downside, due to the arm position, the range of motion of the exercise is decreased, and the important shoulders and triceps get significantly less work than in classic full pushups. For this reason, this exercise (like wide pushups) won’t make you stronger at doing pushups, so unless you’re trying to fix a relative weakness in your chest area, I’d avoid them.

### Gecko Pushups
There are four levels of difficulty to the gecko pushup. In the easiest version the athlete does full pushups, but with one ankle hooked over the other so that only one foot is making contact with the floor. These are sometimes called three-point pushups. In the second version, the athlete raises one leg off the floor, but keeps it locked straight out behind him as he does his pushups. This nuance doubles the isometric involvement of the movement’s stabilizers; the legs, hips, waist and spinal muscles. It also requires greater balance and focus than the normal pushup. In the third version the athlete keeps both legs on the floor, but stretches one arm out straight in front of him, level with his head. This is essentially a one-arm pushup, but with one limb pointing forward instead of being secured next to the lower back. In the fourth and hardest version of the gecko pushup, the athlete combines the second and third versions. He lifts one arm out straight in front, as well as stretching the opposite leg out behind him as he performs the movement. Doing pushups in this manner requires significant upper body strength and a lower back of steel in order to remain stable. In this position, the athlete resembles a lizard lifting alternate feet from the baking desert floor, hence the name “gecko” pushups. Gecko pushups are a fun finishing exercise to include in your routine when you have the strength. Be sure to do an equal number of reps on either side to keep development symmetrical.

### Plyometric Pushups
Also known as clapping pushups. This is the standard pushup, but done explosively. Keeping the body ramrod stiff, descend quickly into the bottom position before driving up so hard that the hands leave the floor briefly. While in mid-air, clap the hands together in the split second before your palms meet the floor again and then repeat the exercise. The more powerfully you push, the further away you’ll be able to get from the floor, and the more times you’ll be able to quickly clap before coming back down. Many guys are able to do triple or even quadruple claps. An extremely difficult version is the one-arm clapping pushup, where you push up with just one arm before clapping. Clapping “pushups add speed and are an excellent addition to your routine, once in a while. They can lead to injury however, so work into them slowly and don’t even attempt them until you have at least mastered uneven pushups.”

### Stretch Pushups
This is the standard pushup, but performed with the hands on two raised objects on either side of the torso. You can buy specially made pushup handles for this, but placing the palms on two chairs will have the same effect. When you do pushups with your hands on a flat surface (like the floor), your range of motion is limited by that surface; but doing pushups with your hands on raised objects means you can lower your chest further than the point where it would normally be stopped by the floor. The feet can either be below the hands, or level (or higher) through being put on a bed, desk, another chair, etc. I’m not a big believer in stretch pushups. Stretching the muscles under resistance is painful, and does lead to increased “soreness after the workout, but this is entirely due to microtrauma within the muscle tissue—it doesn’t mean the muscles will get bigger or stronger. Stretching muscles won’t increase your size or strength. If you want to make your pecs burn, do stretch pushups. If you want all-over upper body muscle and might, work through the ten steps and give stretch pushups a miss.

### Jackknife Pushups
With your toes flat on the floor, place your palms on the ground at some point in front of you so that you are bent approximately ninety degrees at the hips. (This angle is called the jackknife position, because your body resembles an opening pocket knife.) Your hands should be about shoulder width apart, and despite the angle at the hips, your torso should be straight. Retain a gentle bend at the knee. Bending at the arms and shoulders, lower your chin until it kisses the floor at a point between your hands. Now continue moving your chin in an upwards arc, as your hips drop to brush the ground. You should finish the movement with your arms and legs straight, your shoulders high and your hips low. Keeping your arms straight, push your butt out and back until you are in the starting position again, and repeat. This exercise is easier on the upper body muscles than regular pushups, although the jackknife bending and straightening motion builds strong, flexible hips. For this reason, the exercise is popular with martial artists and wrestlers. Sometimes this exercise is known as a cat pushup, or by its Indian name, the dand.

### Divebomber Pushups
These used to be popular in the Marine corps, back in the 70s. They are similar to jackknife pushups, except you bend your arms on the way back to the start position (in jackknife pushups, bend your arms as the hips move down, but you keep your arms straight when they go back up). Bending the arms a second time increases upper arm involvement, but lessens the effectiveness of the exercise as a flexibility movement.

### Diagonal Pushups
Get into same the bent-over pushup position used to begin jackknife pushups. Your body should be bent well at the waist, with the hips high in the air, and your arms and legs almost straight. Keeping the legs together will make things harder. Now bend at the arms and shoulders, but instead of dropping your hips—as you would for jackknife or divebomber pushups—keep your body locked at a ninety-degree angle. Keep bending your arms until the top of your forehead gently touches the floor, and push back up. The body must stay at the same angle until you finish all your reps. It’s easier to do this if your heels are jammed up against a wall. This exercise works the shoulders more than the conventional pushup. It’s fun to do, but just like decline pushups, the handstand pushup is a far better alternative if you want to work your shoulders hard.”

### Handstand Pushups

### The Plank
The plank is not really a pushup. It’s a static feat of strength that was a favorite amongst the strongmen of the second Golden Age, although it stretches back much further than that. The old-timers loved this exercise, and not without reason—the plank requires strength in almost every single muscle of the body, as well as balance and coordination. Besides which, it makes for a cool party trick. Place your palms on the floor shoulder width apart, bend your arms, tucking your elbows into your torso, and lean forwards until your feet are off the ground with the legs locked. To maintain this position, your back and legs have to be stiff as a board—hence the name “plank.” This is an extremely difficult exercise to visualize without a picture, so I’ve included a photo below to help. The exercise is a tough one to pull off; the key is persistence along with the development of basic strength through practicing the ten steps. Keep it up and I guarantee you’ll get there. The plank was popular amongst Canadian strongmen and for this reason it’s still often known by its French name, the planche. In English-speaking countries it is sometimes known by its gymnastics name, the elbow lever.

### Incline Tiger Bends
This is an exercise performed by a lot of bodybuilders who find themselves in prison and want to maintain their arm size. Although it’s a bodyweight exercise, it’s more like a barbell triceps extension than a true pushup, because it works the triceps but not “the pectorals or shoulders. Lean forwards at a forty-five degree angle, grabbing a solid object in front of you. In prison, wash basins usually fit the bill, but if you are training at home you might want to use a kitchen counter or a work surface You can even do the exercise with your palms flat on a wall, opposite your chest. Keeping the elbows pointing down, bend at the elbows but not at the shoulders. Continue moving forwards as far as you can or until your upper arms meet your torso, then press yourself up. Plenty of strict reps will have your triceps screaming for mercy.”

### Maltese Pushups
These are an obscure variation of the pushup often used by gymnasts, because they partially mimic training on the rings. Maltese pushups look a little like full pushups, but the hands are placed in line with the hips, and quite far out from the body. If you were to draw a line up the athlete’s torso and another from palm to palm in this position, the two lines would approximate a Maltese cross, hence the name of the exercise. The movement required by this type of pushup is difficult to appreciate unless you actually see an expert doing it. Maltese pushups work the biceps as well as the triceps, but the technique can be rough on the inner elbows. Unless you are a gymnast, I’d disregard them.”

